[ZIP 230, ZIP 246] v6 transaction format and sighash (#987)
zcash/zips: zips/zip-0246.rst

This proposal also defines the new concept of "sighash versioning": where previously
each transaction version had a single associated digest algorithm, going forward it
will be possible for signers to use any digest algorithm within the closed set
specified for a given transaction version (and made available in consensus via network
upgrades).

==========
Motivation
==========

TBD

TODO: Motivate sighash versioning

============
Requirements
============

- Continue to support existing functionality of the protocol (multisig,
  signing modes for transparent inputs).

- It should be possible to update this ZIP with additional digest versions after the first
  version has been deployed in a network upgrade.

================
Non-requirements
================

TBD

=============
Specification
=============

------------------
Sighash versioning
------------------

Rough summary:

- Sighash versions are numbered starting from 0 for each tx version.
- v0 is by convention the "commit to everything" sighash digest. Other versions can commit to whatever makes sense for desired functionality within that tx version.

> - Have a single byte encoded alongside the signature (not appended the way transparent does) that permits the signer to specify which sighash version they are using.

Author: In ZIP Sync, we discussed how this should be represented. We identified that one of the issues we have with how transparent sighash types are handled is that they are considered authorizing data (they are appended to signatures and are thus part of the signature, chosen at signing time by the signer). We decided that for sighash versioning, we'd prefer them to be effecting data. This means:
- For Sapling `spendAuthSig`, this would be an extra byte on the Spend Description.
- For Orchard `spendAuthSig`, this would be an extra byte on the Action Description.
- For `bindingSig`s, we place an extra byte in the corresponding bundles.
- For transparent, due to the lack of a 1:1 between inputs and signatures (as an arbitrary number of signatures can exist within a `scriptSig`), this would be an extra byte on the CTxIn that is used for _every_ signature authorizing the input.
  - @daira doesn't think we need it at the per-input level for transparent (Ya Ain't Gonna Need It), while @str4d says this is useful for symmetry (the effecting data is then consistently at the per-input level). @nuttycom is happy to have it at the per-input level for now, and we can adjust if we discover difficulties.
  - Note that there is no requirement for future sighash digest algorithms to pay any attention to the `sighash_type` appended to each signature. It is entirely fine for us to treat that as a v0-specific behaviour (or even decide to phase it out in future transaction versions, though we are explicitly choosing to keep it for the v6 transaction's v0 digest algorithm).

Reviewer: I rather strongly don't want very much if any additional complexity or work associated with transparent features.

> - Consensus rules choose the digest algorithm for each signer based on that byte.

Author: We should clarify that the consensus rules choose from the available digest algorithms for the `(consensus_branch_id, transaction_version)` tuple under question (both of which are committed to by the transaction, and can therefore be checked non-contextually). For the NU7 consensus branch ID, there will only be one available digest version for v6 transactions (the v0 digests).

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdHeadersHash"

T.3b: sapling_outputs_digest
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
In the case that Sapling outputs are present, this digest is a BLAKE2b-256 hash of the
following values ::

   T.3b.i:  sapling_outputs_compact_digest    (32-byte hash)
   T.3b.ii: sapling_outputs_noncompact_digest (32-byte hash)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdSOutputHash"

In the case that the transaction has Sapling spends but no Sapling outputs,
``sapling_outputs_digest`` is ::

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdSOutputHash", [])

T.3b.i: sapling_outputs_compact_digest
......................................
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the subset of Sapling output information included in the
ZIP-307 [#zip-0307]_ ``CompactBlock`` format for all Sapling shielded outputs
belonging to the transaction. For each output, the following elements are included
in the hash::

   T.3b.i.1: cmu                  (field encoding bytes)
   T.3b.i.2: ephemeral_key        (field encoding bytes)
   T.3b.i.3: enc_ciphertext       (field encoding bytes)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxId6SOutC_Hash" (1 underscore character)

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Reviewer 2: This link is not present in the references. Should it instead be:
```suggestion
The field encodings are specified in §7.4 ‘Output Description Encoding and Consensus’ of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-outputdesc]_.
```

T.3b.ii: sapling_outputs_noncompact_digest
...........................................
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the remaining subset of Sapling output information **not** included
in the ZIP 307 [#zip-0307]_ ``CompactBlock`` format, excluding zkproof data, for all
Sapling shielded outputs belonging to the transaction. For each output, the following
elements are included in the hash::

   T.3b.ii.1: cv                    (field encoding bytes)
   T.3b.ii.3: out_ciphertext        (field encoding bytes)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxId6SOutN_Hash" (1 underscore character)

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Reviewer 2: As above
```suggestion
The field encodings are specified in §7.4 ‘Output Description Encoding and Consensus’ of the Zcash Protocol Specification [#protocol-outputdesc]_.
```

T.4: orchard_digest
```````````````````
When OrchardZSA Actions Groups are present in the transaction, this digest is a BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values::

    T.4a: orchard_action_groups_digest   (32-byte hash output)
    T.4b: orchard_burn_digest            (32-byte hash output)
    T.4c: valueBalanceOrchard            (64-bit signed little-endian)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

    "ZTxIdOrchardHash"

In the case that the transaction has no OrchardZSA Action Groups, ``orchard_digest`` is ::

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdOrchardHash", [])

T.4a: orchard_action_groups_digest
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the subset of OrchardZSA Action Groups information for all OrchardZSA Action Groups belonging to the transaction.
For each Action Group, the following elements are included in the hash::

    T.4a.i   : orchard_actions_compact_digest      (32-byte hash output)
    T.4a.ii  : orchard_actions_noncompact_digest   (32-byte hash output)
    T.4a.iii : flagsOrchard                        (1 byte)
    T.4a.iv  : anchorOrchard                       (32 bytes)

>     T.4a.v   : nAGExpiryHeight                     (4 bytes)

Reviewer 2: This is now proposed and discussed in #991

T.5a.i: issue_notes_digest
..........................
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of Note information for all Notes belonging to the Issuance Action. For each Note, the following elements are included in the hash::

   T.5a.i.1: recipient                    (field encoding bytes)
   T.5a.i.2: value                        (field encoding bytes)
   T.5a.i.3: rho                          (field encoding bytes)
   T.5a.i.4: rseed                        (field encoding bytes)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdIAcNoteHash"

In case the transaction has no Issue Notes, ``issue_notes_digest`` is::

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdIAcNoteHash", [])

The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issue-notes-field-encodings]_.

T.6: memo_digest
````````````````
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values ::

   T.6a: nonce                 (field encoding bytes)
   T.6b: memo_chunks_digest    (32-byte hash output)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdMemo___Hash" (3 underscore characters)

In case the transaction has no memo chunks, ``memo_digest`` is::

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdMemo___Hash", [])

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Reviewer 2: I think this should correspond to this section of ZIP 231 (which defines ``nonceOrHash`` rather than ``nonce`` though)
```suggestion
The field encodings are specified in ZIP 231 [#zip-0231-encoding-in-transactions]_.
```

The modifications replace the ``orchard_digest`` in ZIP 244 with a new ``orchard_digest``, and add a new branch, ``issuance_digest``, for the Issuance Action information.

The overall structure of the hash is as follows. We omit the descriptions of the sections that do not change for the OrchardZSA protocol::

    signature_digest
    ├── header_digest
    ├── transparent_sig_digest
    ├── sapling_digest
    ├── orchard_digest
    ├── issuance_digest
    └── memo_digest

signature_digest
----------------
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values ::

   S.1: header_digest          (32-byte hash output)
   S.2: transparent_sig_digest (32-byte hash output)
   S.3: sapling_digest         (32-byte hash output)
   S.4: orchard_digest         (32-byte hash output)
   S.5: issuance_digest        (32-byte hash output)
   S.6: memo_digest            (32-byte hash output)

The personalization field remains the same as in ZIP 244 [#zip-0244]_, namely::

  "ZcashTxHash_" || CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID

``ZcashTxHash_`` has 1 underscore character.

S.4: orchard_digest
```````````````````
Identical to that specified for the transaction identifier.

S.5: issuance_digest
````````````````````

> Identical to the ``issuance_digest`` specified for the transaction identifier in ZIP 227 [zip-0227-txiddigest]_.

Reviewer 2: Since ``issuance_digest`` is now in the same file (i.e. ZIP 246):
```suggestion
Identical to that specified for the transaction identifier.
```

.. [#protocol-txnencoding] `Zcash Protocol Specification, Version 2022.3.8. Section 7.1: Transaction Encoding and Consensus <protocol/protocol.pdf#txnencoding>`_
.. [#zip-0200] `ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism <zip-0200.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0230-transaction-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: Transaction Format <zip-0230.rst#transaction-format>`_
.. [#zip-0230-orchard-action-group-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: OrchardZSA Action Group Description  <zip-0230.rst#orchardzsa-action-group-description>`_
.. [#zip-0230-orchard-action-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: OrchardZSA Action Description <zip-0230.rst#orchardzsa-action-description>`_
.. [#zip-0230-orchard-asset-burn-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: OrchardZSA Asset Burn Description <zip-0230.rst#orchardzsa-asset-burn-description>`_
.. [#zip-0230-issue-actions-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: Issuance Action Description <zip-0230.rst#issuance-action-description>`_

> .. [#zip-0230-issue-notes-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: Issue Note Description <zip-0230.rst#issue-note-description>`_

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. [#zip-0230-issue-notes-field-encodings] `ZIP 230: Version 6 Transaction Format. Specification: Issue Note Description <zip-0230.rst#issue-note-description>`_
.. [#zip-0231-encoding-in-transactions] `ZIP 231: Memo Bundles. Encoding in transactions <zip-0231.md#encodingintransactions>
```

.. [#zip-0244] `ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability <zip-0244.rst>`_
.. [#zip-0244-sigdigest] `ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability: Signature Digest <zip-0244.html#signature-digest>`_

> .. [#zip-0244-authcommitment] `ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability: Authorizing Data Commitment <zip-0244.html#authorizing-data-commitment>`_

Reviewer 2: There are links to citations of ZIP 307 on L195, L213, L262 and L281 which do not have a reference here.
```suggestion
.. [#zip-0244-authcommitment] `ZIP 244: Transaction Identifier Non-Malleability: Authorizing Data Commitment <zip-0244.html#authorizing-data-commitment>`_
.. [#zip-0307] `ZIP 307: Light Client Protocol for Payment Detection <zip-0307.rst>`_
```

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZcashTxHash_" || CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID

``ZcashTxHash_`` has 1 underscore character.

As in ZIP 244 [#zip-0244]_, CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID is the 4-byte little-endian encoding of
the consensus branch ID for the epoch of the block containing the transaction.

T.1: header_digest
``````````````````
A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values ::

   T.1a: version             (4-byte little-endian version identifier including overwinter flag)
   T.1b: version_group_id    (4-byte little-endian version group identifier)
   T.1c: consensus_branch_id (4-byte little-endian consensus branch id)
   T.1d: lock_time           (4-byte little-endian nLockTime value)
   T.1e: expiry_height       (4-byte little-endian block height)
   T.1f: fee                 (8-byte little-endian fee amount)
   T.1g: burn_amount         (8-byte little-endian burn amount)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxIdHeadersHash"

T.3b: sapling_outputs_digest
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
In the case that Sapling outputs are present, this digest is a BLAKE2b-256 hash of the
following values ::

   T.3b.i:  sapling_outputs_compact_digest    (32-byte hash)

>    T.3b.ii: sapling_outputs_noncompact_digest (32-byte hash)

Reviewer 3: TODO: all we need is the noncompact digest.

   T.3b.ii.1: cv                    (field encoding bytes)
   T.3b.ii.3: out_ciphertext        (field encoding bytes)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

  "ZTxId6SOutN_Hash" (1 underscore character)

The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-sapling-output-field-encodings]_.

T.4: orchard_digest
```````````````````
When OrchardZSA Actions Groups are present in the transaction, this digest is a BLAKE2b-256 hash of the following values::

    T.4a: orchard_action_groups_digest   (32-byte hash output)
    T.4b: valueBalanceOrchard            (64-bit signed little-endian)

The personalization field of this hash is set to::

    "ZTxIdOrchardHash"

In the case that the transaction has no OrchardZSA Action Groups, ``orchard_digest`` is ::

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdOrchardHash", [])

T.4a: orchard_action_groups_digest
''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

A BLAKE2b-256 hash of the subset of OrchardZSA Action Groups information for all OrchardZSA Action Groups belonging to the transaction.
For each Action Group, the following elements are included in the hash::

    T.4a.i   : orchard_actions_compact_digest      (32-byte hash output)

>     T.4a.ii  : orchard_actions_noncompact_digest   (32-byte hash output)

Reviewer 3: TODO: all that we need here is the noncompact digest.

  "ZTxId6SOutC_Hash" (1 underscore character)

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Author: Likewise here, undo this removal and instead fix its link to point to the correct ZIP 230 section.

  "ZTxId6SOutN_Hash" (1 underscore character)

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Author: Likewise here, undo this removal and instead fix its link to point to the correct ZIP 230 section.

    BLAKE2b-256("ZTxIdMemo___Hash", [])

> The field encodings are specified in ZIP 230 [#zip-0230-issuance-field-encodings]_.

Author: This shouldn't have been removed; instead its URL link should have been fixed to point to the part of ZIP 230 containing the spec for the fields used in `memo_digest`.
